---
layout: post
title: If X Then Y - Sufficiency and Necessity
date: 2022-11-11
tags:
  - Math123
---

**If then** is one of the most important and common logic format we see everyday. When we see **if X, then Y**, the relation can be represented symbolically as:

$$ X \rightarrow Y $$

This is a **cause and effec** relation, a logically equivalent one is called its **contrapositive**:

$$ \neg Y \rightarrow \neg X $$

However, we must bear in mind that **if X, then Y** does not logically give rise to the following relations:

- **if Y, then X**, or $Y \rightarrow X$
- **if NOT X, then NOT Y**, or $\neg X \rightarrow \neg Y$

Back to the $X \rightarrow Y$ assertion, we say **X** is a **sufficient** condition guranteeing the truth of **Y**, but is not necessary for **Y** to happen (in another word, there may be other conditions sufficient to give rise to **Y**), and **Y** is a necessary condition required for **X** to be true, but not sufficient to guarantee for **X** to happen.

Now we explore some signal words for both sufficient and necessary conditions:

**Sufficient signal words:**

- If S then Y.
- All S are Y.
- Every S is Y.
- Whenever S happens, Y happens (or Y happens whenever S happens).
- Each time S happens, Y happens (or Y happens each time S happens).
- S is enough (or adequate or sufficient) to Y.
- In order for S to happen, Y must happen (or Y must happen in order for S to happen).

**Necessary signal words:**

- Y happens only if N happens.
- In order for Y to happen, N must happen (or N must happen in order for Y to happen).
- Only N are Y.
- The only way Y can happen is if N happens.
- Y isn’t possible unless N happens.
- Y depends on N.
- N is required for Y.

  <br>
